docs/how-to/use-network-api.md, before:

# Use the AI model snap via its network API

The AI model snaps expose a standard network API.
In most cases this API conforms to the [OpenAI API specification](https://github.com/openai/openai-openapi).

Depending on which stack is currently selected, the base path of this API might be different.
Look up the HTTP port and base path via snap option:

```{terminal}
:input: sudo snap get <ai-snap> http
Key             Value
http.base-path  v1
http.host       127.0.0.1
http.port       8080
```

From your local computer, the API can be accessed using these values.
The URL for the API should be built up using these, in the format: `http://localhost:<http.port>/<http.base-path>/`.
Which in this example would be http://localhost:8080/v1/.

If the `http.host` value is set to `127.0.0.1`, the model can only be accessed from the local device.
If it is however set to `0.0.0.0`, any other device on the network can use it, as long as your firewall allows it.

From any other computer, the full URL will be similar to above, but with `localhost` replaced by the IP address or hostname of the device.

## Model name

Some servers require you to specify the exact model name when querying it via the API.
An OpenAI compliant API lists available models under `<api-url>/models`.
If the server does not implement this endpoint, the model name can also be looked up in the snap options:

```{terminal}
:input: sudo snap get <ai-model> 
Key            Value
http           {...}
model-name     <model-name>
...
```

## Test with `curl`

If your installed model supports chat completions, you can use its API URL to make a test prompt:

```sh
curl http://localhost:8080/v1/chat/completions \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{
"model": "<model-name>",
"messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Hi there!"}],
"temperature": 0.7
}' | jq
```

This should return a JSON response looking similar to this: 
```json
{
  "choices": [
    {
      "finish_reason": "stop",
      "index": 0,
      "message": {
        "role": "assistant",
        "content": "Hello! How can I assist you today?"
      }
    }
  ],
  "created": 1752591235,
  "model": "<ai-model>",
  "system_fingerprint": "b1-6a746cf",
  "object": "chat.completion",
  "usage": {
    "completion_tokens": 10,
    "prompt_tokens": 11,
    "total_tokens": 21
  },
  "id": "chatcmpl-YvRT8bwvQB6YMYBjrdjMf7zumamNTIB3",
  "timings": {
    "prompt_n": 1,
    "prompt_ms": 116.811,
    "prompt_per_token_ms": 116.811,
    "prompt_per_second": 8.560837592350035,
    "predicted_n": 10,
    "predicted_ms": 824.103,
    "predicted_per_token_ms": 82.41029999999999,
    "predicted_per_second": 12.134405529405912
  }
}
```

## Using other clients

Other OpenAI API compatible clients can also make use of these snaps.
Configure the clients with the API URL and the model name obtained above.

Commit message:

Apply suggestions from code review
Co-authored-by: Farshid Tavakolizadeh <email@farshid.ws>

docs/how-to/use-network-api.md, after:

# Use an AI model snap via its OpenAI API

The following AI model snaps expose an [OpenAI API](https://github.com/openai/openai-openapi) complaint network API:
* xxx
* xxx


Depending on which stack is currently selected, the base path of this API might be different.
Look up the HTTP port and base path via snap option:

```{terminal}
:input: sudo snap get <ai-snap> http
Key             Value
http.base-path  v1
http.host       127.0.0.1
http.port       8080
```

From your local computer, the API can be accessed using these values.
The URL for the API should be built up using these, in the format: `http://localhost:<http.port>/<http.base-path>/`.
Which in this example would be http://localhost:8080/v1/.

If the `http.host` value is set to `127.0.0.1`, the model can only be accessed from the local device.
Set it to `0.0.0.0` if you want to access it from other device on the network.

From any other computer, the full URL will be similar to above, but with `localhost` replaced by the IP address or hostname of the device.

## Model name

Some servers require you to specify the exact model name when querying it via the API.
An OpenAI compliant API lists available models under `<api-url>/models`.
If the server does not implement this endpoint, the model name can also be looked up in the snap options:

```{terminal}
:input: sudo snap get <ai-model> 
Key            Value
http           {...}
model-name     <model-name>
...
```

## Test with `curl`

If your installed model supports chat completions, you can use its API URL to make a test prompt:

```sh
curl http://localhost:8080/v1/chat/completions \
-H "Content-Type: application/json" \
-d '{
"model": "<model-name>",
"messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Hi there!"}],
"temperature": 0.7
}' | jq
```

This should return a JSON response looking similar to this: 
```json
{
  "choices": [
    {
      "finish_reason": "stop",
      "index": 0,
      "message": {
        "role": "assistant",
        "content": "Hello! How can I assist you today?"
      }
    }
  ],
  "created": 1752591235,
  "model": "<ai-model>",
  "system_fingerprint": "b1-6a746cf",
  "object": "chat.completion",
  "usage": {
    "completion_tokens": 10,
    "prompt_tokens": 11,
    "total_tokens": 21
  },
  "id": "chatcmpl-YvRT8bwvQB6YMYBjrdjMf7zumamNTIB3",
  "timings": {
    "prompt_n": 1,
    "prompt_ms": 116.811,
    "prompt_per_token_ms": 116.811,
    "prompt_per_second": 8.560837592350035,
    "predicted_n": 10,
    "predicted_ms": 824.103,
    "predicted_per_token_ms": 82.41029999999999,
    "predicted_per_second": 12.134405529405912
  }
}
```

## Using other clients

Other OpenAI API compatible clients can also make use of these snaps.
Configure the clients with the API URL and the model name obtained above.
