docs/index.rst, before:

AI Model Snaps
==========================

AI model snaps allow you to package famous AI models as snaps that can be deployed on all compatible hardware. 

It checks the hardware available on the host machine and recommends the stack that is optimized for the available hardware.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 2

   Tutorials </tutorial/index>
   How-to guides </how-to/index>
   Reference </reference/index>
   Explanations </explanations/index>

In this documentation
---------------------

.. grid:: 1 1 2 2

   .. grid-item-card:: Tutorials
      :link: /tutorial/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Get started** - a hands-on introduction to AI model snaps for new users.

   .. grid-item-card:: How-to guides
      :link: /how-to/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Step-by-step** guides covering key operations and common tasks

.. grid:: 1 1 2 2

   .. grid-item-card:: Reference
      :link: /reference/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Technical information** - specifications, configuration files, architecture.

   .. grid-item-card:: Explanations
      :link: /explanations/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Concepts** - discussion and clarification of key topics.
   
Project and community
---------------------
AI model snaps is a Canonical product undergoing internal development. 
Access to this documentation must be covered under Canonical's NDA.

Commit message:

feat: Adding boiler plate information to home page, contributing.md, and release-notes.md.
Signed-off-by: odadacharles <charles.odada@canonical.com>

docs/index.rst, after:

AI Model Snaps
==========================

AI model snaps allow you to package famous AI models as snaps that can be deployed on all compatible hardware. 

It checks the hardware available on the host machine and recommends the stack that is optimized for the available hardware.

In this documentation
---------------------

.. grid:: 1 1 2 2

   .. grid-item-card:: Tutorials
      :link: /tutorial/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Get started** - a hands-on introduction to AI model snaps for new users.

   .. grid-item-card:: How-to guides
      :link: /how-to/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Step-by-step** guides covering key operations and common tasks

.. grid:: 1 1 2 2

   .. grid-item-card:: Reference
      :link: /reference/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Technical information** - specifications, configuration files, architecture.

   .. grid-item-card:: Explanations
      :link: /explanations/index
      :link-type: doc

      **Concepts** - discussion and clarification of key topics.
   
Project and community
---------------------

AI model snaps is a member of the Ubuntu family. 
It's an open source project that warmly welcomes community projects, contributions, suggestions, fixes and constructive feedback.

- `Code of conduct <https://ubuntu.com/community/docs/ethos/code-of-conduct>`__
- `Contribute to our code <https://github.com/canonical/deepseek-r1-snap>`__ 
- :ref:`Contribute to our documentation <contribute-to-our-docs>`
- :ref:`Release notes<release-notes>`


.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   :maxdepth: 1

   Tutorials </tutorial/index>
   How-to guides </how-to/index>
   Reference </reference/index>
   Explanations </explanations/index>
   contribute-to-our-docs
   release-notes
